when now life's happening and i have the
actual things to be stressed out about
can i use my breath to regulate myself
in those moments
the normal
range of psychological suffering is a
story of telling yourself a story you're
thinking
part of me that's debilitated by anxiety
that and according to gestalt therapy is
a character that resides in me
it's not thinking about the mountaintop
you can
by the way you breathe
you can change the electricity in your
mind
this too
shall pass that's the good and the bad
generalized anxiety means that you have
so many triggers now for your anxiety
i'll give you one of mine this was so
bizarre to me
this is when i first thought oh i don't
think i'm nervous i don't think i'm a
nervous person i think this has
officially reached levels of anxiety if
i turned so i used to work in a parking
garage where you know you would go up to
four or five or whatever and every day i
would just turn right turn right turn
right turn right all the way down but
you could turn right or left
and i remember one day for whatever
reason i turned left and i had this
sudden spike of anxiety and i was like
why the hell would i be anxious about
turning left and so that was when i
realized okay whoa whoa like this isn't
even now attached to any sort of major
thing this is about me
overextending doing something new going
into the unknown and i realized that
that was the beginning of the anxiety
for me that because i'm not a born
entrepreneur getting into business was
this incredibly anxiety provoking
endeavor the stakes were so high i felt
like i was constantly on stage like it
was nuts
and
so i realized oh my god anytime i do
something quote unquote out of my
comfort zone no matter how minor
my brain has now
allowed itself to condition itself to be
anxious about anything that sort of
deviated from the norm
and
when we boil it back down to what is
anxiety
anxiety is
living in the future and worrying about
it okay you're mentally projecting into
the future and you are worried about it
and you
allow yourself yes allow yourself to
worry
and it feels like
it feels like
you're doing yourself a solid
because you're thinking through all the
things that could go wrong so you want
to be ready
i remember i used to okay
i'm going to get in you know this
situation in a meeting or whatever and
at some point the eyes are going to turn
to me so what do i do if my heart starts
racing and i'm getting panicky
what do i do about that and i realized
that i would sit there and be like okay
i'm gonna
you know maybe i can say that i've got a
stomachache or a headache or something
and i'll find a way out of the room
all i was doing in those moments was
rehearsing
it going wrong
that i was gonna get into this situation
and need an exit
and then i realized you know a better
approach
because all my planning to make sure
that i'm ready
is the thing that's making me anxious
okay i i want that to hit home that is
the thing that's making you anxious is
that you're thinking about you might get
anxious
what kind of utility or usefulness are
we looking for and what do i mean when i
say this
a lot of us when we're looking to create
change we actually want the people
around us to be the ones changing
so it's kind of the radical you know
kind of self-responsibility ownership
the conversation i always have around
boundaries boundaries aren't ultimatums
they're not me pointing some finger at
you tom and giving you you know if you
do this this will happen if you don't do
this this will happen
boundaries are for self-empowerment so i
answer and i think about things in the
same context right
what am i looking what pattern am i
owning here um what role am i playing
and how can i create change whether or
not
you're being an active agent or an
active player as well and sometimes this
means being radically honest with
ourselves and exploring what our
intentions are what our behaviors are
and how we're participating in the
pattern
even in the moments where we're pretty
much convinced it's not us um so i think
a lot of times it's that deep level of
self-exploration
that can give us clarity on that
generally
just learning about how feelings worked
was very helpful
the guy i've been working with for the
last
six to eight years
he does a thing called gestalt therapy
which is very interesting it was very
big in
you know the 50s or 60s and it kind of
waned but it's really interesting so
it's some people do call it like the
empty chair work and that's essentially
gestalt therapy so for instance
there's the part of me that's
debilitated by anxiety so that and
according to gestalt therapy is
a character that resides in me i have a
lot of dif there's a chorus of voices of
course of characters that reside in each
one of us you simply engage in a
conversation with that character so it's
this kind of actors actually do really
well with it it's kind of like role
playing so you have myself there's the
therapist over here and there's an empty
chair so i'm me then i have a
conversation with
my anxious guy i'm like tell me about
yourself i remember sometimes i've been
just debilitated by anxiety i couldn't
move i um i i was
tongue-tied sweating in panic attacks
like
who are you and what what are you about
that you kind of take me over in that
way
and then i get you literally get up
and you walk over and you sit in that
other chair
and you talk back to the empty chair
that guy talking back to rain to
reasonable rain
and that guy you don't know what's going
to come out you do you don't try and
plan it you just try and just
it's like improv you just step into the
shoes of that person and by the way you
can do this all with writing too you can
just do conversations by writing and
some people take to that a lot more
easily and then that guy might say like
you you know you're a piece of [__] and
nobody likes you and so i'm you're
you're terrified of being found out as a
total fraud and unlovable and so i'm
there to protect you and and if that
happens like i'm gonna i'm gonna
i'm gonna protect you and you're gonna
i'm gonna seize you up and i'm gonna
overwhelm you so that i'm just by the
way i don't know that any of this that
i'm saying is is the truth i'm just
giving an example super helpful
and and you can do that with all of
these different characters in your head
and
um
they then they cease to have that as
much control because they're not these
characters swimming in the sea of our
unconscious that sometimes leap out with
their tentacles and grab on and control
us
they're much more like oh when you hear
that voice you you start to feel the
anxiety like oh there's mr anxiety guy
again
or you try and control it's like oh
there's my control freak i wonder what
he's trying to control or there's my
angry act reactive guy going again it
kind of it allows that kind of distance
to know that
i don't have to be a victim to these
characters that live within me
so now going back to our woman with
postpartum depression so she's having
these thoughts um they're giving her a
neurochemical cascade where she is
having a physiological response to this
she's confusing the physiological
response with what's actually causing
this
how does she then begin to back out of
that like how does she
the what what is the process the mood
journaling and all of that is going to
help her get out
well there's there's two phases to it
now when i wrote feeling good it was
just how to crush the negative thoughts
but now i think it's worth walking us
through that i think people
understanding the the sort of gist of
the 10 cognitive distortions well sure
let's let's do that then maybe later we
can talk about this amazing new thing
that speeds recovery
so much
uh
but but uh
you know she
what is she telling herself well she's
telling herself it's my fault that that
the baby isn't nursing
i i'm a failure as a mother
and also
i shouldn't have mixed feelings about
having a child mothers are supposed to
just love their their children
and uh
and though those thoughts have all of
the classic cognitive distortions for
example uh uh should statements i i i
shouldn't have mixed mixed feelings
um
also uh self-blame
it it's my fault that the baby is is
having trouble uh nursing
that that type of thing and
she had about eight thoughts and they
all had multiple distortions you know
all or nothing thinking looking at
things in black or white
uh categories emotional reasoning is
huge
a lot of people are listening right now
feel depressed
and hopeless so that they feel like
losers so they say i must be a loser i
feel like a loser i must be hopeless i i
feel hopeless
she's also involved in mind reading
thinking oh other mothers don't have
mixed feelings other mothers are you
know these ideal
ideal mothers
and and so that's the first step is to
recognize that what you're telling
yourself
is not true
it's it's distorted
the second thing is to realize that it's
it's kind of mean-spirited what what
you're doing to yourself
what is anxiety anxiety is you are
catastrophizing about the future so i'm
guessing if you're worried about going
to the gym you're thinking oh my god
they're going to judge me they're going
to think i'm a loser i'm fat i'm weak
i'm skinny i'm whatever your concern is
you've got to pattern interrupt that
you've got to stop it you've got to
focus on not what other people think
about you you've got to focus on what
your goal is and if your goal demands
you go to a gym if you want to be more
social and your goal demands you go out
and meet people then that's what we're
going to do so we're going to do
whatever we have to in order to
get beyond that sense of like this is a
terrible thing so now this is where we
put our meditation in this is where we
stop our catastrophizing we do the
pattern interrupt we start thinking
about oh man this is going to be great
i'm not good at social stuff yet
but i'm going to get good
tom told me action cures all so i know i
need to go do this thing there's nothing
to panic about because the only thing
that you're quote unquote panicking
about is some future thing that's going
to happen but what's really going to
happen let's say everybody judges you
they they think that you are a loser
they think that you are fat they think
that you are skinny they think that you
are dumb whatever now did you die
or do you survive that and more
importantly do you get a little bit
better a little stronger a little more
resilient it's really easy to think
about when you think about going to the
gym if everyone there thinks that you
are fat or skinny or whatever
but you show up to the gym every day and
you put in the work they cannot stop you
from getting the result that you want
so they can throw all the shade they
want which by the way they're not nobody
gives a [__] about anybody else to be
honest like they might give you a
sideways glance and think you're a loser
but they're worried about themselves
they're thinking about themselves
they're trying to look cool or feel good
or be proud of themselves or move
forward in their life or whatever and
the odds that they're spending any
significant amount of time thinking
about you is basically zero so
the great news is no matter what they're
thinking about you they cannot stop you
from getting the result that you want
when you show up and put in the work so
focusing on getting a little bit better
every day that's really the goal so
whatever your goal is
it mandates certain actions the good
news is action cures all the even better
news is that you can interrupt that
escalation mentally with a pattern
interrupt with a focus on the fact that
you can get better reminding yourself of
empowering statements instead of
disempowering statements and then you
just get to work just do the thing and
every time your brain starts worrying
about the future remind yourself
if i let myself sit here and think about
this this will become the easiest
thought for me to think this will become
the easiest feeling for me to feel which
means that when my brain walks into a
gym or a bar or whatever i will have
trained it to trigger over into this
negativity i suffered from severe
anxiety attacks
i would get anxiety
attacks where i would be
on the subway in new york city like
shaking and was afraid that people were
going to think that i was like a crack
addict because i was like sweating i'm
kind of sweating right now actually but
that's more from the
la weather but um
uh
you know i would be shaking and sweating
on the subway um
panicking or days i couldn't get out of
bed sometimes i would just fall to the
ground
these came and went
for years sometimes they would be
attached to a thing so all of a sudden
they would get attached to flying and
then i would have this terrible fear of
flying then it would go away from flying
and then it would be enclosed spaces and
i would get it around and close spaces
then it would just kind of
randomly happen
how did you as an actor on the stage how
did you deal with that that's gotta be a
pretty big trigger
um to literally be on stage in front of
people
yeah yeah in fact it was a big deal i um
i it never happened on stage
but
i would get that fear you know that when
you get that cold
chilled ice water in your veins like
heart thumping fear like oh oh [__] this
thing is about to happen i would get
that terror that i was on the stage
because i did theater for 10 years
before i came to l.a and eventually did
the office so um i did a lot of
different plays a lot of different
styles of acting characters and i was
terrified that one of these days i was
gonna seize up on stage forget all my
lines and start shaking and sweating do
you have a guess as to why it didn't
happen
well
i think
i think that it's like people who
stutter like i have a couple friends
that stutter and when they're acting
they don't stutter they're actors who
study so in real life they stutter and
when they're on stage playing characters
they don't stutter so what is that about
there's a certain part of the brain that
you're using there's a certain
consciousness and focus that you're
bringing to the words that you're saying
that
um
i think allow you to not stutter and to
not succumb to panic attacks what is up
my friend tom bilyu here and i have a
big question to ask you how would you
rate your level of personal discipline
on a scale of one to ten if your answer
is anything less than a ten i've got
something cool for you and let me tell
you right now discipline by its very
nature means compelling yourself to do
difficult things that are stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring and even when you might be afraid
of the outcome if you fail building your
levels of personal discipline is not
easy but let me tell you it pays off in
fact i will tell you you're never going
to achieve anything meaningful unless
you develop discipline if you're not
already a 10 out of a 10 with this skill
and i use that word intentionally
because it is a skill you can build it
you can get better at it class from
impact theory university called how to
build ironclad discipline that teaches
you the process of building yourself up
in this area so that you can push
yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
promise if you want to achieve your
goals this is the number one thing you
have to focus on as jacob willing says
discipline equals freedom right click
the link on the screen register for this
class right now and let's get to work i
will see you inside this workshop from
impact theory university until then my
friends be legendary peace out
what techniques do we have beyond that
things that are sort of the mental
equivalent of going to the gym
we want to practice it consistently so
starting there this isn't the light
switch i like to say a lot of us you
know maybe discover consciousness we
know it's there maybe we've practiced
once oh i can use my attention i can
come here be present
yet we don't practice consistently
enough um even those of us with a
meditation practice where maybe that's
the purpose of that one or two or five
minutes where i'm sitting my question
always remains what about the rest of
your day so if you had to force rank the
tools so is meditation number one alarms
are number two like what what is the the
value stack of
um practicing attention
consciousness is the foundation so
whether or not you can develop your
consciousness muscle by sitting
as a sitting meditation for some of us
beginning if i were to speak from my own
experience tom that was so overwhelming
my body didn't feel safe my thoughts
raced i felt so agitated when i would
try to sit silently that i actually
began to build my consciousness muscle
in real time setting those alarms
because i found that as i went about my
day and my alarm went off and say i was
on a walk being consciously present on
my walk felt a little less intimidating
so i say that to say consciousness is
the practice we can develop it sitting
in quiet turning inward or
in real time and those of us that feel a
bit overwhelmed by the first practice
can do it in any thing we're doing we
can use any context any activity and use
our focus of attention to be conscious i
see you you're doing brazilian jiu jitsu
you're somebody who obviously cares
about martial arts and being able to
fight and defend yourself i've heard you
talk very eloquently about
violence and clearly in your
professional life you've
just even just what you've done in the
writing let alone the lecturing you've
already achieved such massive success
refused to believe that there wasn't a
just massive amount of energy behind
that
so how do you think about meditation in
that context is this like going to war
with your mind and you're i'm going to
come out the other side having face
demons uh and having won some sort of
victory that allows me to perform at a
higher level or am i totally missing all
of this and it needs to be a letting go
a more peaceful relaxed sort of
transient experience yeah well at first
it's a very common association i i
totally understand it and it's presented
in many ways
where yeah you under that framing you
can just feel the testosterone leaving
your body you know
so
uh yeah that's not my orientation it is
a lot like
jiu jitsu for the mind and it's and it's
a lot like it i mean what's so beautiful
about jujitsu in particular is that
you can have this massive effect in the
domain of violence
while being relaxed it is what aikido
off you know advertises itself to be but
it's a much more you know at least in my
estimation a much more effective version
of that same
underlying ethic where you can like you
can
control someone
and
use as little violence as as necessary
and basically just use
a superior knowledge of physics and
leverage and position against them so
it's a very
it can be incredibly relaxed and yet
um
given what the circumstance is it can be
a
very high testosterone experience you
know it's not it's a kind of
quintessentially
masculine thing to be doing
but
you can internalize the same sort of
structure
and
that's largely what meditation is
because basically
the default state is one of being
attacked
and ambushed all the time
by your thoughts and by your reactivity
and by
uh you are being taken in
by assumptions and and illusions and not
know yet just you just you you're in a
fog
not you personally but you know one is
and
um
you know even when you learn to meditate
you're in this fog most of the time i
mean and you're cut so the practice
is one of continually breaking the spell
you were constantly on the mat
constantly finding yourself in a
position
of some surprising disadvantage right
like it's like all of a sudden there's a
rear naked choke that's you know three
quarters applied right
and
you need an answer for that and
not knowing the answer is just
synonymous with death
what you eat what you drink what you
take in
all of it matters so much
i'll even say lifestyle might be a
better answer so your diet is a huge
portion of it but your exercise routine
is also critical so if you know you have
something stressful coming up i'm going
to recommend get your diet on point
beyond the scope of this video to go
into that but i'll say really quickly
whole foods just eat whole foods things
that look like it looked when it was
walking around or like it looked when it
was in the ground
okay if you stick as close to that as
humanly possible you're going to be
headed in the right direction
then the next part is
getting your exercise right so actually
working out pushing yourself and then
even more important than the exercise
is meditation
so you're you can actually change the
structures of your brain
by meditating
let that
land
you can change
the s the physical structure of your
brain
by meditating
you become more emotionally resilient
you become more able to focus on a task
over long periods of time
a lot of really fascinating things
happen when you meditate so if i were
trying to preemptively self soothe
that's exactly what i would do
diet
exercise
and sleep
that's a critical part and then
meditation
belly breathing diaphragmatic breathing
changed my life so i'd be curious to
know what tools you use for that
yeah so for a lot of us
who struggle with our posture it's hard
um so back straight shoulders back
so i started laying down it was
difficult for me so i would begin my
practice either right before bed or
right when i woke up when i was already
laying and for me it started with just a
small daily promise of five breaths from
my deep belly area for me putting my
hand on my belly physically so i could
feel it
when it would expand and when it would
deflate was really helpful so that was
just a daily promise every time every
morning or right before bed i would put
my hand on my belly and just practice
practice practice but then like i said i
wanted to become more aware of how i was
using my breath all day long and then
building on that foundation can i
harness my breath all day long when now
life's happening and i have the actual
things to be stressed out about right
can i use my breath to regulate myself
in those moments so it becomes a
foundational practice that we can build
upon what i would be helping them do is
create the pathway that requires the
least amount of energy because the brain
is hard wiring it it's
wrapping it in the myelin sheath so that
the electrical signals are trans um
they're going more efficiently and so
the brain from a caloric usage
standpoint is trying to do whatever is
most efficient and so simply through
intelligent repetition you're moving
people into the default network of the
brain so they can sort of [__] space
out and when they space out they're
becoming more calm their default
reaction is the de-excitation of the
nervous system yeah no i like what i'm
hearing
uh so the question is repetition and i
agree it's not thinking about the
mountaintop you can by the way you
breathe you can change the electricity
in your mind we've seen that with the
people we put grids on like we have
actual measurements now but that's the
you know what's the structure where you
get the most out of repetition what is
the
perfect spot
where
meditative breathing hits that sweet
spot for people and they'll increase it
if it continues to benefit them but the
food
the breathing sleep is a hard one but to
me
um food
what we eat
and
meditative breathing i think are the
most
uh graspable
and measurable uh the creativity stuff
the sleep stuff
uh the exercise stuff is harder for
people
uh but the exercise stuff is in its own
way the most important if we could get
back to that ooh why keeps your brain
arteries open releases all these
neurotrophic factors inside your brain
so not just the plumbing that irrigates
the flesh of the brain tell me about it
but ignf yeah they're nerve growth
factors they're all neurotrophic factors
and
whatever the
the for the in this case to be
abbreviation gdnf bdnf ngf it doesn't
matter they end with gf
and growth factors so it really is i've
heard your word miracle grow but getting
back to the garden analogy
uh to keep the flesh
we're going to get you know electricity
is one thing
to keep the flesh healthy
uh you have to irrigate it
and that has to do with your brain
arteries
and
since we already said it's not a it's
not a ball
you know it's these uh you know these
jellyfish and they're moving and they're
throbbing and they're pulsating and
their tentacles are reaching out there's
a lot of space in between
and that extracellular space outside of
the actual cells outside the neurons
outside of the jellyfish if you will
it's not just water
there's chemicals floating around in
there
now dopamine might be just from
technical to tentacles
you know serotonin might be this way but
what's it what's in all the stuff around
all those billions and billions of
neurons
they're growth factors
and minerals
and chemicals that the brain naturally
has but there's also a soup that these
billions and billions of neurons are
floating in bdnf is a key component of
that soup that helps regulate the health
of each of those uh jellyfish or nerve
and we can trigger more of that exercise
yeah you exercise
it releases it it showers itself it's
not like the thighs thigh muscles sends
it up to the brain the brain says hey
i'm feeling good this is good i like
this
i'm gonna create a new rut i'm gonna
remind you you feel good when you run
well i would just point out the
mechanics of it which is what is
actually going on is that they're lost
in thought they're they're thinking
without knowing that they're thinking
basically every moment of their waking
life right and the character of that
story
in this case is depressing or or
uh
you know
certainly productive of unhappiness
now
there are two
the three at least three possible
antidotes to that and
they should try all of them right so
like if we're talking about a clinical
depression it's it's useful to say that
there's a physiology to this that you
know can be
driven from below in a way that's not
narrowly responsive to their thinking
right so it's it'll tend to produce
uh depressive thoughts and the
depressive thoughts will tend to feed
back on the state but
you know i don't think all
forms of depression are just a matter of
what a person's thinking it can be
really it's it's best viewed as a kind
of disease you know a physiology and
so you know i'm not against
antidepressants at all i know many
people who've you know received a lot of
help from them and i hope we get better
ones in the future and and pharmacology
is definitely a piece of the of the
solution for for many people
and everything else that is good to do
that people sort of lose their
commitment
to doing at the worst possible time
should be done i mean you have to sort
of get behind yourself and push
to exercise and to socialize and to do
things that you know you you may not
want to do because those are good for
you and help
you know break and can break you out of
it
but the normal
range of psychological suffering
you know not clinical depression but
just feeling like you know life sucks
and you're a failure and there's nothing
you know it's like
uh
you're just
it's you're stuck
that is a story of
telling yourself a story you're thinking
and you can
either become more and more mindful of
that and interrupt that more and more uh
and or and it should be and
you can
reframe
this continually and tell yourself a
better story right you can actually just
engineer
you know you can change the code that
you're that you're you know
uh running moment-to-moment
and
i mean just you know a very simple one
which i you know i use and i actually
recently recorded this
in a lesson on the app you know just
gratitude just thinking this is actually
you know this particular maneuver is
i believe comes from stoic philosophy i
didn't actually get it from stoic
philosophy but this this sort of
use of negative imagination where you
think of
all of the bad things that haven't
happened to you right so if you're just
you know if you're stuck in traffic
driving to the job that you don't like
and
you're you're frustrated
you can think of all the things
that
could happen to you right that haven't
and if any one of them happened to you
you would consider your prayers answered
if you could just be returned to this
moment right like you haven't been
diagnosed with cancer right you've got
two young kids say
you know you want to live to see them
grow up and you could be the guy who
today is going to find out you've got
two months to live right and you have to
then the next two months is spent
just
unwinding your worldly affairs right
you're not that guy right that hasn't
happened to you yet
that's just more thinking but it can
have a profound effect you can you can
reframe
your experience in a way that doesn't
actually change anything material about
your circumstance and it can let the
light in and there are many techniques
like that that are just a matter of
invoking useful concepts skillfully
step number one
don't compare yourself in
to others in a way other than i could
become that with enough time and energy
and effort put into it
and then number two recognize that when
you have a cognitive distortion like
catastrophizing i'll never be that good
right you don't have evidence to support
that and even if you do
it does not serve you to spend time
catastrophizing so you are way better
off just from a neurochemical standpoint
you are way better off doing what's
called a pattern interrupt
stopping yourself from thinking that and
instead of saying so the nice simple
pattern interrupt here i'm never going
to be that good wait
pattern interrupt i'm not that good yet
but i can get that good okay and that
becomes the way that you break that
cycle and the only way to undo that
anxiety is to let it atrophy
now the fastest way to make something
atrophy is to focus on something else so
now the thing that we're going to
replace that catastrophizing with that's
hardwiring into our brain is we're going
to replace it with the way the human
animal works i can get good at anything
right so if it's what i call the only
belief that matters if i put time and
attention into getting better at this
thing i will actually get better that is
the nature of the human animal and so i
would just repeat that i can get good at
anything i can get good at anything and
so that becomes my pattern interrupt
that becomes the thing now that i'm
reinforcing in my mind that becomes the
thought that hardwires that becomes the
feeling that hardwires and now all of a
sudden when i encounter somebody that's
doing something better than me that's
outpacing me whatever the case that's
raising my anxiety levels and i want to
get back to that calm state i'm going to
pattern interrupt that and i'm going to
repeat now something that empowers me
and makes me feel better and by doing
that now i'm reinforcing something that
makes me feel good that makes me feel
expansive
versus contracting so it makes me feel
like i can tackle the challenge and
that's what i'm going to hardwire
you